THREE THINGS HAVE immortalized Sage Ashtavakra. First is his uncommon name, Ashtavakra-one with eight bends. Second, his holy and pure lineage; he was the son of Kahor or Khagodara, a disciple of the great sage Uddhalaka, made famous in the Chandogya Upanishad. Uddhalaka had two children, a daughter named Sujata and later a son, the matchless Shvetaketu. Uddhalaka trained his disciple Kahor well, and noting his diligence and piety, gave Sujata in marriage to him. Third is the Ashtavakra Samhita or Ashtavakra Gita, a thoroughgoing Advaita treatise ascribed to Ashtavakra. 

Kahor and Sujata were ideally suited and lived together happily. Many years passed, and Sujata discovered that she was about to become a mother One day, as her husband was reciting the Vedas in accordance with his daily habit, Sujata felt the developing foetus squirming with evident pain. Alarmed, she was further astounded when the foetus said, 'Father, your intonation of the Vedic mantras is wrong.' Kahor became annoyed. His displeasure kept the unborn boy stationary in the squirming position it was in, and thus the infant was born with eight rounded bends. He was named Ashtavakra because of his physique. 

Kahor passed away before setting eyes on his son. The parents, though rich in knowledge, were materially poor. Under pressing circumstances, Kahor had ventured to the court of King Janaka for some monetary help. Engaged in a Vedic sacrifice, Janaka kept Kahor waiting. After the sacrifice, he was summoned and told that he would get the money if he engaged in a religious debate with Vandini or Vandi, the court's Vedic authority. Further, Janaka said that the loser would have to drown himself. Kahor was defeated in # lengthy contest and had to drown himself. 

Ashtavakra grew up with his uncle Shvetaketu. Since there was not much difference in age between Them, they were more like friends. One day, when Both the boys were bathing in a river, Shvetaketu Ashtavakra about his father. The agitated boy Bufried home, where his mother confirmed the story. ehtavakra proceeded directly to Janaka's court. Being mere boy of twelve and having a twisted body, He was denied entry at the gates. Besides, only the amed were admitted. He was forced to give proof vast knowledge to the guards. This made them Eordial, and they opened the gates. As Ashtavakra need the court, dragging his twisted body along, the Fourt roared with laughter at such a comical He waited for the laughter to die down, then el everyone with his words: 'I was under the uion that Janaka's court was attended by wise al Inow know that they are just a bunch of Athavakra continued: 'The Atman is beyond the limitations of all bodies, whether gross, subtle, or causal. You learned men see only this bag of flesh and bones covered by skin and think of it as real, thus revealing your crude perceptions to be no better than those of cobblers.' He then requested King Janaka to summon Vandi for a debate and to impose the same condition: the vanquished must die by drowning. 

Everyone thought they knew what was in store for the lad in the twisted body. With a sneer on his face, Vandi approached and bowed. The contestants sat down and the debate began. It soon became obvious that this young sage was tearing the pandit's propositions and counter-propositions to shreds. 

Ashtavakra showed that age, size, or shape does het indicate one's knowledge. Vandi was hopelessly defeated. Ashtavakra, now joined by Shvetaketu and Pihers, led Vandi to the lake where many sages, Including his father, had perished because of Vandi's arrogance. As they neared the edge of the lake, Vandi ald, "My dear Ashtavakra, I bless you, and your name will be remembered forever. But I can never le drowned. I am the messenger of Varuna, the god of waters, in disguise. Varuna planned a sacrifice for Hilch sages well-versed in the Vedas were required. V mission was to supply my master with those sages. buch defeated and drowned, those sages were not 

They were immediately taken to Varuna's abode. tacrifice has lasted many years. But it is now over, w the sages will soon return bearing many costly Vandi then leaped into the lake. At the same in Kaher and many other sages emerged from the hoge 

Allitavakra and Shvetaketu were overjoyed to see Kahor and the other sages. When the sages heard of Ashtavakra's accomplishments, they blessed him profusely. Kahor led the two young sages to the river Samanga. He asked Ashtavakra to take a dip in the river. After he did so and was wading back, Ashtavakra found himself suddenly freed from his deformity. 

Another account, in the Brahmavaivarta Purana, says that Ashtavakra was cured of the bends in his body when Shri Krishna embraced him. 

Scattered references to this rishi are few, but we can safely assume that he lived as a jivanmukta, free while yet living, and then merged in Brahman. When Shri Ramakrishna asked the future Swami Vivekananda to read the Ashtavakra Samhita, the latter said that these ideas were blasphemous and ridiculed them. Then, by his mere touch, Shri Ramakrishna bestowed on him the state of Advaita. Vivekananda later said 'Then it struck me that the words of the scriptures were not false.'

### ## =### =### =###====
Ashtavakra is the Commentator of Manava Grhyasutra (By Manavacharya). According to the Mahabharata (Sabha Parva, Adhyaya 7, Verse 12), Uddalaka was a prominent figure in the sabha (court) of Indra. The Vana Parva (Adhyaya 132) of the Mahabharata enumerates that Uddalaka had a son called Shvetaketu and a daughter called Sujata. He gave his daughter Sujata in marriage to his disciple Kahoda (कहोडः) and rshi Ashtavakra (अष्टावक्रः) was their son.

It is stated in Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, Chapter 7, Stanza 12 that this hermit Uddalaka was a prominent figure in the सभा || sabha of Indra. Uddalaka had a son called श्वेतकेतुः ॥ Shvetaketu and a daughter called सुजाता ॥ Sujata. He gave his daughter Sujata in marriage to his favorite disciple कहोदकः ॥ Kahodaka. The hermit अष्टावक्रः ॥ Ashtavakra was their son. (Mahabharata. Vana Parva, Chapter 132).

Shvetaketu was the son of the sage आरुणिः ॥ Aruni or उद्दालकः ॥ Uddalaka who was born in the गौतम ॥ Gautama clan.  Shvetaketu was Uddalaka's son, born to his wife by one of his disciples. (Mahabharata, Shanti Parva, Chapter 35, Verse 22).  Shvetaketu had a sister named Sujata. Astavakra was her son by the sage, Kahotaka. Thus, Shvetaketu was Ashtavakra's maternal uncle and they grew up together in Uddalaka's ashrama.