Dasavatharams of lord Vishnu has been prayed by very many great savants. Below is the Dasavatharam written by Kadathanauu.K.Padmanabha Variar; translated by P.R.Ramachander. <blockquote>Munibhie eeditham , Madhu nishevitham , haya mukhanthakam , bhaya vinasanam , Pralaya Jaladhigam, nalinajarchitham , makara roopinam , Bhaavayaamyaham. </blockquote>Meaning: I cherish him who took the form of fish. Who was praised by the sages, Who destroyed Madhu, Who killed Hayamukhasura, who destroys fear, who was in the water of deluge, and who was worshipped by Goddess Lakshmi. <blockquote>Pithru gana sthutham , dathru sevitham , drutha daradharam , bhootha bhavanam, Ajitham avyayayam sujana palakam kachapathmakam bhavayaamyaham. </blockquote>Meaning: I cherish him who took the form of a tortoise, who was worshiped by groups of manes, Who is served by the creator, who holds the earth, who determines the future, Who cannot be defeated, Who does not have any faults and who looks after good people. <blockquote>Udhrutha kshithim , vaardhvi madhyagam , dithija soodhanam , drutha gadham Harim, Abhaya dhayagam , vibhudha vandhitham , sookarathmakam bhaavayaamyaham. </blockquote>Meaning: I cherish him who took the form of a boar , who lifted the earth from the middle of ocean, Who killed the son of dithi , who was Hari who held the mace , Who gave protection and who is saluted by wise people. <blockquote>Bruthya poshanam , daithya soshanam , bhaktha vathsalam , mukthi dayakam, Sitha nakhayudham , kshatha jalochanam nruhari roopinam bhavayamyam. </blockquote>Meaning: I cherish him who took the form of man lion , who looks after his servants , Who loved his devotees , who grants salvation , Whose weapons were teeth and nails and who killed by making wounds. <blockquote>Kasyapathmajam , viswa roopinam , bali madhapaham , balinameeswaram, Vaasavanujam , baswaropamam vamanakruthim bhavayamyaham. </blockquote>Meaning: I cherish him who took the form of Vamana, who is the son of sage Kasyapa, Who took the mega form, who destroyed the pride of Mahabali, Who is the powerful God , Who is the younger brother of Indra and who shined like Sun. <blockquote>Sankara priyam, mangala pradham . kshathriyanthakam , vikramamsajam, Parasudharinam , sura ganarchitham , brugu kulodhwaham bhavayamyaham. </blockquote>Meaning: I cherish him who was born in the clan of Brugu , who was dear to Lord Shiva , Who gave auspiciousness , who killed all Kshatriyas , Who was valorous , Who was armed with an axe and who was worshipped by Devas. <blockquote>Dasarathathmajam, dasa mukhanthakam , janakajapathim , muni nishevitham, Pavanajarchitham , bhuvana palakm , Raghu kulodhwaham Bhavayamyaham. </blockquote>Meaning: I cherish him who uplifted Raghu clan , who is the son of Dasaratha , Who killed ten headed Ravana , who is husband of daughter of Janaka, Who is praised by sages , who was worshipped by Hanuman and who ruled the earth. <blockquote>Neela vaasasam , thala kethanam balavathaam varam hala dharma balam, Krishna sodharam , Vrushni vamsajam , Rohini sutham VBhavayamham. </blockquote>Meaning: I cherish the son of Rohini , who wears blue cloths , who has a body with rhythm , Who is the greatest among strong, Who is strong holding a plough , Who is brother of Krishna and who belongs to the Vrushni clan. <blockquote>Indirapathim, nana nandanam , vamsa vadhinam , kamsa soodhanam, Bhuvana sundaram , DEvaki sutham , vijaya saradhim bhavayamyaham. </blockquote>Meaning: I cherish the charioteer of Arjuna , Who is consort of Goddess Lakshmi, Who is the son of Nanda , who speaks of his clan , who is the killer of Kamsa , Who is prettiest in the world and who is the son of Devaki. <blockquote>Aswa vahanam , viswa palakam , dushta sikshakam , sishta rakshakam, Kali yuganthyajam balinam achyutham kalki roopinam Bhavayamyaham. </blockquote>Meaning: I cherish The one who has the form of Kalki , who would ride on a horse , Who would take care of the world , who would punish evil people , Who would take care of good people who s is strong and who is Achyutha.