CONCEPTUALISING DHARMA
Dharma is "apaurusheya" (of non-human origin), unlike religions and so is independent of  time, person or the orders of the past. Dharma provides a reference point to ascertain modern ideas, their benefits and their utility in functional life. The more that Dharmic concepts are tested and challenged, the clearer and stronger they emerge, in as much as gold attains the greatest purity when it is placed in fire. Sanatana dharma and civilisational cultures are not based on dogmatic beliefs but are rooted strongly on logical and coherent thoughts. Created religions are primarily founded on domination of other people and rest on blind assumptions as indicated by the innumerable clashes between science and  religious ideology.

The Bhagavad Gita provides innumerable instances that support true wisdom through logical intellect. Some examples are cited below.
क्रोधाद्भवति सम्मोहः सम्मोहात्स्मृतिविभ्रमः ।
स्मृतिभ्रंशाद् बुद्धिनाशो बुद्धिनाशात्प्रणश्यति ॥ २-६३॥

From anger, complete delusion arises, and from delusion bewilderment of memory. When memory is bewildered, intelligence is lost, and when intelligence is lost one falls down again into the material pool.

दूरेण ह्यवरं कर्म बुद्धियोगाद्धनंजय ।
बुद्धौ शरणमन्विच्छ कृपणाः फलहेतवः ॥  २-४९ ॥ 
 O Dhanañjaya, keep all abominable activities far distant by buddhi yoga, and in that consciousness surrender unto the Lord. Those who want to enjoy the fruits of their work are misers.

चेतसा सर्वकर्माणि मयि संन्यस्य मत्परः ।
बुद्धियोगमुपाश्रित्य मच्चित्तः सततं भव ॥ १८-५७॥
In all activities just depend upon Me and work always under My protection. In such buddhi yoga, be fully conscious of Me.

बुद्धियुक्तो जहातीह उभे सुकृतदुष्कृते ।
तस्माद्योगाय युज्यस्व योगः कर्मसु कौशलम् ॥ २-५०॥
A man engaged in buddhi yoga rids himself of both good and bad reactions even in this life. Therefore strive for yoga, which is the art of all work.

इति गुह्यतमं शास्त्रमिदमुक्तं मयानघ ।
एतद्बुद्ध्वा बुद्धिमान्स्यात्कृतकृत्यश्च भारत ॥ १५-२०॥
This is the most conﬁdential part of the Vedic scriptures, O sinless one, and it is disclosed now by Me. Whoever understands this through buddhi yoga will become wise, and his endeavors will know perfection.

नास्ति बुद्धिरयुक्तस्य न चायुक्तस्य भावना ।
न चाभावयतः शान्तिरशान्तस्य कुतः सुखम् ॥ २-६६॥
One who is not connected with the Supreme in buddhi yoga can have neither transcendental intelligence nor a steady mind, without which there is no possibility of peace. And how can there be any happiness without peace?

The Shrutis and Smritis have a vast literature base that establish the connection between logical wisdom and Dharmic traditions. Protecting dharmic traditions through Intellectual scholarship is sufficient in itself and unlike created religions of the world does not require weapons of mass destruction. The inclusiveness of Dharma is indicated by the fact that one never encounters Rishis and Sadhus cultivated by political parties for electoral gain, giving fatwas or diktats to destroy whom they consider ‘pagans’ and their cultures or people following other  faiths.

Every civilisation goes through upheavals as in our case, yet the truth is that of the 46 civilisations, only our civilisation survives despite almost one thousand years of foreign domination. The colonisation of the Indian mind due to the cultural imperialism of the Anglo-Saxon nations through the notion of secularism has created an illusion that the bharatiya tradition is living and there is no need to connect our people to their roots. Revival is synonymous with life and not the sign of death. And the challenge is to revive the indigenous knowledge in alignment with the Shastras.   

Documenting the slanderous propaganda that was unleashed by the East India Co since its entry into Bharat in 16th century would certainly be voluminous. Yet not making a mention of it at all would be an unforgivable error on our part. Schools and university textbooks spread not only distortions and misconceptions but also falsehoods of our glorious dharma traditions that succeeded in the fructification of the Macaulay’s (1935) plot of transforming our culture of entrepreneurs and craftsmen into a nation-state of English speaking Coolies and Clerks.  A few instances of the EIC’s extensive strategy to make Bharat the Anglo-Saxon cultural satellite are stated:
Frank Thilly (1914) considered a great scholar, believes that the philosophy of all civilisations should be studied but not those from the East and especially not from India.  He supports this by the point that they are frozen in time within the Puranic lore, that is full of emotional songs and hence such literature cannot be called 'philosophy'. At best they can be only a ‘primitive belief system’, adding that western ‘philosophy’ is not made of such ideas.

Some Indologists posit that of the eleven paths, only Christianity, Islam and Buddhism are universal religions, denying this position to Sanatana dharma. Whatever is there in Sanatana dharma, termed Hinduism through the 1839 Census (Jois 2002) by the East India Company (EIC) can be found in these religions, and hence there is nothing new to learn. Hinduism tenets are rooted in cruelty wherein the elites, namely the Brahmins are trying to dislodge humanity. Some of the distorted doctrines outlined are:
The Varnashrama (stages of life as per the Dharmic worldview) is the foundational fault of dharma tradition as it is anti-progress. 
Women are disregarded.
The governing 'law of karma' is a philosophy that makes the human being inactive and useless.  The 'Karma Siddhanta' is a strategy that makes individuals tolerate injustice and is a theory that supports escaping one's problems. 
Dharmic traditions only talk about other-worldly concepts and even that is the prerogative of the elite class.  There is only god with no reference to the social sciences (Titus 1973).
 
The first chair for Sanskrit was established by Borde and he writes in his will, "the main purpose of this funding is to translate the Christian writings into Sanskrit and help converting Indians. This is quoted in the most commonly-used famous Monier-Williams's Sanskrit-English dictionary's introduction (page 9). What other proof do we need speak for the objective of this institution in compiling our Dharmic literature to show it replete with vicious distortions.  That Wilson, Wrath, Whitney, Max Muller, Yakobi, Keith and Bloomfield's compilation remain the reference books for all of us is nothing short of catastrophe for India. Eventually these same authors penned "the system of habits and the "Science Linguistic construe" that continues till date and it is shocking that no one has critically analysed the utility of these compilations and its role in shaping the destiny of our country and its people.

Max Muller, the architect of the fake Aryan invasion theory, writes the following passage in his history of Sanskrit literature (1902 page 32):
For the whole humanity to accept Christianity will take long time. History tells us that we need to organise education systematically. To make the light of truth acceptable by everyone, we need to facilitate the madness of diversity.  The Sanatana dharma is like baby milk for human existence and that needs to be replaced with proper food.  Our narrow vision may make us feel that Buddhism which has gone beyond the borders of "Aryavarta", can cause difficulty in spreading the mission of Christ.  To him (their God) what is a mere thousand years? These old religions could be the actual path for Christianity to spread.  Why cant these very religions, by their very fault, make their followers to look for truth and come to Christianity and it very strong?"
Not only did he introduce the term ‘religion’ instead of Dharma but the ‘great Indologist' termed the Vedas childish, gibberish, boring, low class and having nothing fresh and relevant and found it puzzling as to why his compatriots praised our classical texts. Also despite his ridicule of the Vedas, that he chose to translate the Hitopadesha or the Rig Veda or even be interested in them clearly exposes the diabolical motive of the East india Company of whom he was merely an employee. Not only he did he have the intellectual capacities to create original works but translated and misinterpreted our classical texts to suit his evangelical agenda as explained to his wife (1813 as cited in Muller, 1902):
My translations are going to change the fate of India.  Vedas are the root of Indian dharma. To show what they are and uproot the tree which is standing for more than three thousand years is the strategy of these compilations (chap. 15, page 346)

In the introduction to the volume "The religion of Rig Veda", in the series The Religious quest of India published by Oxford University, the editor Farkuhar claims that the purpose of the translations is to place the Vedic books next to Christian works and prove Christ is the light of their life. The search of Indians through Dharmic literature, that has been going on since ages will reach its ultimate destination in Christ.

As was with Max Muller, this genocidal devious mindset continues to prevail. The notion that whatever is good in sanatana dharma is influenced by Christianity and what is termed as 'evil' is attributed to Hinduism is a strategy that had its genesis in the conquest of India and not whether our Dharma needs reformation or the Christian light. That the white traders when they arrived in Bharat were awed by the greatness and richness of our culture is clearly enunciated by Max Mueller (1883) in a lecture at the University of Cambridge, entiled, "What can India teach us?":
If I were to look over the entire world to find out the country most richly endowed with all the wealth, power and beauty that nature can bestow – in some parts a very paradise on earth – I should point to India. If I were asked under what sky the human mind has most fully developed some of its choicest gifts, has most deeply pondered on the greatest problems of life, and has found solutions to some of them which well deserve the attention even of those who have studied Plato and Kant– I should point to India. And if I were to ask myself from what literature we, here in Europe, we who have been nurtured almost exclusively on the thoughts of Greeks and Romans, and of one Semitic race, the Jewish, may draw that corrective which is most wanted in order to make our inner life more perfect, more comprehensive, more universal, in fact more truly human, a life, not for this life only, but a transfigured and eternal life – again I should point to India.
To believe that their prophet is the only representative of God and those do not adhere to this truth will be cast into hell forever is itself a grave aberration. The precepts of a religion that propagated killing, plunder, denigrates women by not treating them as partners was preached as gospel truth and also sought to disown our Dharmic tradition dubbing them as uncivilised and 'pagan'. Dharma which propounds respecting other’s paths, तेजस्वि नावधीतमस्तु मा विद्विषावहै (may our study be enlightening and not give rise to Hostility) is considered 'narrow minded'. Is this not the vision of the blind and unwise?   

It is ironical that a culture steeped in materialism, that has categorised woman into the ‘worker’ role and sees her as an object of pleasure, bereft of the 'atma', without an identity is claiming to be universally friendly. On the other hand a civilisation that states "यत्र नार्यस्तु पूज्यन्ते रमन्ते तत्र देवता, यत्रैतास्तु न पूज्यन्ते सर्वास्तत्रफलाः क्रियाः ("Yatra naryastu pujyante ramante tatra Devata, yatraitaastu na pujyante sarvaastatrafalaah kriyaah") is disregarded as not being a philosophy. There could not be a better example to substantiate the charges of cultural imperialism on our colonisers and invaders. Also its not just subversion but evil and unethical as it falsifies our rich and profound knowledge base. 

A perusal of the history of people who invaded us reveal their dark history of genocide (Jones 2004), slavery, oppression and religious, political and financial control of other civilisations. In the medieval ages, in the name of religion and 'civilising the Pagans', Christian and Arab warlords and traders through trade, slaughtered and burnt alive millions of people across the world to assume control of indigenous people's territories.  

There was an agenda behind the denigration and distortion of our philosophy by the EIC that later folded up to become the British Government. It was not just economic genocide (from 31% in 1750 to 2% in 1950, OECD Reports) but through academic terrorism ensuring continued control not just of our occupations & lifestyle but most importantly our minds. T.S. Elliot, the English poet claimed that his earnest endeavour to understand Indian philosophy and the Sanskrit language was impossible as the translation undertaken by the Indologists only caused further confusion and unless he renounced his western mindset, it was difficult to understand the deeper thoughts. Whatever little understanding he had of the Vedic Rishis and their philosophies was seen in his poetry, yet he says that he had difficulty in engaging in discourse with 'academics' who had this negative mindset towards dharmic traditions.  
Unfortunately, due to the extremely well-strategised Indology systems, our academicians and 'intellectuals' continue to promote their thoughts to our new generations as if it were nectar.  

Any person who takes up to the study of other paths will not do so unless he has clear idea of his own path and conclusions, his understanding of right and wrong. Max Müller (1868) clearly demonstrated the EIC’s devious intentions when he requested George Campbell, the newly appointed Secretary of State for India for increased funding for education in India as it would help compile a new form of literature (Indology) for the cultural takeover of Bharat post the economic and political takeover that was achieved through trade and creation of an administrative system to suit the colonial agenda. 
India has been conquered once, but India must be conquered again, and that second conquest should be a conquest by education. Much has been done for education of late, but if the funds were tripled and quadrupled, that would hardly be enough (...) By encouraging a study of their own ancient literature, as part of their education, a national feeling of pride and self-respect will be reawakened among those who influence the large masses of the people. A new national literature may spring up, impregnated with Western ideas, yet retaining its native spirit and character (...) A new national literature will bring with it a new national life, and new moral vigour. As to religion, that will take care of itself. The missionaries have done far more than they themselves seem to be aware of, nay, much of the work which is theirs they would probably disclaim. The Christianity of our nineteenth century will hardly be the Christianity of India. But the ancient religion of India is doomed—and if Christianity does not step in, whose fault will it be? 

Just as Max Mueller and the EIC were very clear on their intentions to study our ancient and presently the only surviving civilisation, we need to take this step to revisit our roots and create our own narrative. We need to reconquer Bharat, not the great ciivlisation as cultures do not need reclaiming, but the reclaiming of the Bharatiya colonised mind. This would be beginning of new journey that would free us from the stranglehold of western or Islamic imperialism. These series would contribute to this process, despite the fact that this compilation is not welcomed by some who continue to operate as British sepoys as intended by the Anglo-Saxons to further their agenda of making Bharat its labour source as well as its market that would help maintain its dominant position globally."
References:
Jones, Adam (Editor). (2004). In Genocide, War Crimes & the West: History and Complicity. New York: Zed Books Ltd. 
Dharampal. (2000). The Beautiful Tree: Indigenous Indian education in the Eighteenth Century. Collected Writings, Vol III. Mapusa: The Other India Press.
Idem, The Trading World of Asia and the English East India Company, 1660-1760, Cambridge, 1973.
Hobsbawn Eric. (2012) The Age of Revolution, New York: Vintage Books
Jois, M.R. (2002). Supreme Court judgment on "HINDUTVA": An Important Landmark (2nd Ed.). New Delhi: Suruchi Prakashan.
Sharp, H. (ed.). 1920. Selections from Educational Records, Part I (1781–1839). Superintendent, Govt. Printing, Calcutta
Thilly, Frank (1914). A History of Philosophy. New York: Henry Holt and Company.
Young, G.M (Ed.) (1935). Speeches by Lord Macaulay with his Minute on Indian Education. Oxford University Press, London.