#DharmaWiki articles tap into the traditional well-established research heritage of India, reflected in the intellectual writings and translations of Bharat's scholars, whose knowledge base was founded on the guru-shishya parampara.
#Compilation of the subject matter involves extensive research of Vedic literature available both in libraries and on reliable internet sources. ([http://shodhganga.inflibnet.ac.in:8080/jspui/ Shodhganga], [http://vedicheritage.gov.in/ Vedic Heritage Portal], [https://archive.org/ Internet Archives], Digital Library of India and Sanskrit Literature sites such as Sanskrit ebooks and Sanskrit Documents). Research thesis works of modern day research students (published in shodhganga), find an expression in DharmaWiki articles.
#Subject matter is supported by direct quotations from vedic and vedantic literatures to remove ambiguity, numerous interpolations and extrapolations, and psychoanalysis thereby allowing the readers to independently develop unbiased thoughts (based on the presented primary sources). 
#Sanskrit content material (words, slokas, mantras) is used to improve the subjects’ visibility and promote usage. References to grammatical texts, Shabdakalpadruma, Vachaspatyam, Nirukta reinforce the concepts. 
#Easily approachable structure of the articles gives the comprehensive information sought for by the masses.
#Scholarly views about principles of Sanatana dharma (Punarjanma, Moksha) are collected through personal interaction with learned scholars in Samskrit forums and a record of such conversations are presented under the Discussion heading. 
#Fundamental concepts of Dharma - the moral code of conduct applicable for every living being under different circumstances are presented. Example : Judicial aspects from Manusmriti, Dharmashastras. A first hand information from scholars about the traditional view-points of socially contentious topics (Example : Yama-Yami samvada) are included.
#Lucid presentation of ancient practices such as Nityakarmas (Aupasana and Agnihotra) serve as reference manuals (of conventional practices) to promote their revitalization in the society.
#Topics that are profound with esoteric insights of ancient seers provide an insight into the characteristics of the vedas and vedanta. Examples : Vidya (Brahmavidya, Bhumavidya, Panchagnividya), Mahavakyas, Yajna (Shrauta yajnas), Margas (Paths in life and for enlightenment) such as Pravritti and Nivritti, Shastras (Nyaya and Mimamsa).
Category:About Dharmawiki