Lahgutrayee (लघुत्रयी) refers to the group of 3 classical treatises on basic principles of Ayurveda (आयुर्वेदः). There are 2 such groups of classical texts or treatises. The other group is known as Brhtrayee or the greater triad while Laghutrayee is known as the lesser triad or the lesser trio. Madhavanidanam (माधवनिदानम्), Sharangadhara Samhita (शार्ङ्गधरसंहिता) & Bhavaprakasha Samhita (भावप्रकाश संहिता) are the 3 classical texts on Ayurveda which are collectively known as Laghutrayee. Sometimes one more classical text named, Yogaratnakara (योगरत्नाकरः) is also included in this group replacing anyone of the above 3 compendiums. These 3 treatises on Ayurveda are compilation of material taken from ancient Ayurveda texts Brhatrayee (बृहत्रयी). However this material has been put in a simplified manner and few additions to the original content have been done in laghutrayee. Laghutrayee offer description on basic principles of Ayurveda like svasthvrttam (स्वस्थवृत्तम्), nidanapanchakam (निदानपञ्चकम्), panchakarmas (पञ्चकर्माणि), various rogas (रोगाः diseases), their chikitsa (चिकित्सा treatments) and various medicinal formulations. Thus these treatises provide knowledge on various aspects of Ayurveda and help to understand various concepts in depth.

## परिचयः॥ Introduction
Ayurveda is a Shastra. Any shastra is described in written form systematically in a specific pattern. Being a treatise on a Shastra which deals with the life of individuals, all Ayurveda treatises are very meticulous in presenting the subject matter and written with utmost precision following a methodical approach. Ancient Ayurveda scholars have scripted and presented their knowledge in a very structured, codified manner to ensure uniformity and effectiveness. 

In this lineage are some compendiums that present the knowledge in the form of proceedings, as a conversation between the disciple and a preceptor. Brhatrayee & Laghutrayee are the examples of this category. Brhatrayee (बृहत्रयी) & Laghutrayee (लघुत्रयी) are called as Greater triad/trio and lesser triad/ trio respectively. The other treatises are in the form of Nighaṇṭu (निघण्टु Lexicon) format. Nighantus are found to have clarification and explanations to the words used in the treatises of previous groups. 

All texts complement each other and one cannot be well versed in Ayurveda without going through these materials together. These treatises, specifically those from the Brhatrayee & Laghutrayee, are considered to be the gold standards for studying authentic Ayurveda.

## व्युत्पत्तिः॥ Etymology
* Laghu (लघु) means Minor or small
* Trayee (त्रयी) indicates a triad or group of 3 (contents).
Thus, Laghutrayee denotes minor group/triad of classical treatises. 

## आयुर्वेदशास्त्रस्य ग्रन्थनिर्माणः॥ The making of Ayurvedic literature
Right from the time of emergence of Ayurveda, its descent on the earth and its further propagation through various schools, the only method of transfer of this knowledge was through oral tradition. Later on, many pious saints and devoted physicians recorded vast knowledge from the oral tradition into the written form. These texts presenting the knowledge in written form are known as Samhita. Samhita (संहिता) that literally means “to arrange together in union” or “a structured combination of verses or texts” in the written format. Thus, Samhita is commonly called as compendium or treatise.

Some of these very popular treatises were passed on from generation to generations without any break, surviving multiple hurdles like destruction by evil forces and natural calamities. Charaka Samhita (चरक संहिता), Sushruta Samhita (सुश्रुत संहिता) and Ashtanaga Hrdayam (अष्टाङ्ग हृदयम्) are the most important and trusted classics among these which have been passed on till date from few thousand years. These are considered to be the most trusted sources of knowledge of Ayurveda. They provide the knowledge of all the branches of Ayurveda in a systematic pattern. Thus, together they are known as Brhatrayee. Brhat means greater or larger and trayee means triad or trio. Hence Brhatrayee is also called as the Greater triad.

In the later time, large number of physicians and scholars ventured to write more such wonderful texts on Ayurveda based on the foundations of knowledge obtained from popular treatises passed on in this way. These scholars went on adding their own observations and started recording them in the perfect order without deviating themselves from the basic principles of Ayurveda.

These newer treatises were updated with relevant new herbs, diseases or therapeutic modalities popular at that time. All these treatises provide knowledge on various aspects of Ayurveda and help to understand various concepts in depth. Laghutrayee encompasses those classical treatises which were developed after referring the major primary treatises, not necessarily covering knowledge from all branches of Ayurveda rather focusing mainly on one special branch to great extent. Therefore, this group is called as lesser triad. Brhatrayee is the greater triad.  

## लघुत्रयी॥ The lesser triad
The lesser triad includes,
# Madhavanidanam (माधवनिदानम्) - The classical Ayurveda treatise which is mainly focused on the Nidanapanchaka (5-fold assessment of disease and clinical diagnosis) of various rogas (Diseases)
# Sharangadhara Samhita (शार्ङ्गधरसंहिता) - The classical Ayurveda treatise which is mainly focused on Pharmacology & pharmaceutics in Ayurveda
# Bhavaprakasha Samhita (भावप्रकाश संहिता) - The classical Ayurveda treatise which is mainly focused on the study of the herbs and their clinical utility.
One more classical treatise is considered equally important as the treatises of Laghutrayee. It is known as Yogaratnakara which mainly focuses on the management and treatment of various diseases. It is widely popular as the handbook of Ayurveda treatment.

## माधवनिदानम्॥ Madhavanidanam
The word Madhavanidanam is made up of 2 parts, Madhava and Nidanam. Madhava is the name of the author of this treatise. Nidana refers to diagnosis or understanding the pathological aspects of disease. Therefore name of the treatise itself suggests that 'nidana' (diagnosis) aspect is the focus of this treatise. This classical text authored by Madhavakara dates back to 700 AD. This compendium is also known as 'Rugvinishchaya' (रुग्‍विनिश्चिय) or 'Rogavinishchaya' (रोगविनिश्चय). 'Rug'  (रुग्/रुक्)means pain or disease causing pain while 'vinishchaya' (विनिश्चयम्) refers to diagnosis. Therefore the text that guides on diagnosing diseases was originally named as 'Rugvinishchaya' by the author 'Acharya Madhavakara' (आचार्य माधवकरः). 

The compendium of Madhavanidanam comprises of 2 parts having 69 adhyayas (Chapters) in total adopted by 6 out of 8 branches of Ayurveda such as Kayachikitsa (कायचिकित्सा Internal medicine), Graha (ग्रहः Astrology and transcendence), Shalyatantra (शल्यतन्त्रम् Diseases for surgical intervention), Shalakyatantra (शालाक्यतन्त्रम् Diseases of ENT), Kaumarbhritya (कौमारभृत्यम् Paediatrics, all encompassing of Obstetrics and gynecology), Agadatantra (अगदतन्त्रम् Toxicology) while excluding Rasayana (रसायनम् Rejuvenative) and Vajikarana (वाजीकरणम् Aphrodisiac) of Ashtanga Ayurveda.

Madhavanidana includes systematic methods to understand the nature of the disease and identify the types or subtypes of the diseases. The first chapter of Madhava nidana is dedicated to Nidanapanchaka (निदानपञ्चकम्) which is the basic principle of disease diagnosis in Ayurveda. It encompasses five aspects of clinical diagnosis 2 viz. Hetu (हेतु etiological considerations), Purva-rupas (पूर्वरूपाणि Prodromal symptoms), Rupas (रूपाणि clinical features), Samprapti (संप्राप्तिः patho-physiological processes), and Upashaya-anupashaya (उपशय-अनुपशयम् therapeutic diagnostics). Besides this for most of the diseases, Upadrava (उपद्रवाणि clinical manifestations of complications) and Sadhyasadhyatva (साध्यासाध्यत्वम् prognostic features) are also believed to be important while making and confirming the diagnosis. These are also mentioned in Madhavanidana at relevant sites. <blockquote>For more details click on Madhavanidanam (माधवनिदानम्).</blockquote>

## शार्ङ्गधरसंहिता ॥ Sharangadhara Samhita
This Samhita (संहिता classical treatise) is also named after its author Acharya Sharangadhara (आचार्य शार्ङ्गधरः). It is one of oldest treatise that describes in depth about pharmaceutical methods of medicines and formulations used in Ayurveda. Ayurveda acharyas have meticulously designed various preparations and formulations of medicinal and dietary substances while keeping in mind status of multiple factors like Doshas (दोषाः), dhatus (धातवः), malas (मलाः), Agni (अग्निः), balam (बलम्), vaya<nowiki/>s (वयः) and Prakrti (प्रकृतिः) of the individual etc. The logic behind development of various types of formulations, their preparation methods, their appropriate application etc. can be found in Sharangadhara Samhita for the first time in detail. This can not be found in currently available versions of Brhatrayee (Charaka Samhita, Sushruta Samhita and Ashtanga Hrdayam). Thus, Sharangadhara Samhita is widely referred treatise of Ayurveda in Ayurveda fraternity. Along with the pharmaceutics, the treatise also deals with in depth description on 2 systems of measurements in ancient India viz Magadha mana (मागध मानम्) and Kalinga mana (कलिङग मानम्). 8 fold clinical examination method in Ayurveda has also been described and it is known as Ashtavidha pariksha (अष्टविध परीक्षा) which also includes Nadipariksha (नाडीपरीक्षा). <blockquote>For more details click on Sharangadhara Samhita (शार्ङ्गधरसंहिता)</blockquote>

## भावप्रकाश संहिता ॥ Bhavapraksha Samhita
The treatise is named after its author Bhavamishra (भावमिश्रः). It is the most recent of the classical treatises in laghutrayee. Bhavapraksha samhita is divide into 3 parts known as purva (पूर्व), madhya (मध्य) and uttara (उत्तर) khanda (खण्डः). Knowledge on almost all the aspects of Ayurveda with special focus on Kayachikitsa (कायचिकित्सा Medicine) can be found in this treatise. 

The Purva khanda part comprises Nighantu (निघण्टुः lexicon) which is popularly known as Bhavaprasha nighantu. It includes in depth information on various aspects of herbs like rasa (रसः), guna (गुणाः), veerya (वीर्यम्), vipaka (विपाकः), prabhava (प्रभावः) of herbs used in Ayurveda medicine. The second part of purvardha (पूर्वार्धः First section), contains a lot of information on the basic concepts in Ayurveda and  Panchakarma (पञ्चकर्माणि five purificatory procedures) along with Nighantu (lexicon).

Madhyama khanda (middle section) includes adhyayas on diagnosis and management of diseases. It described nidanapanchaka and follows order of diseases as described in Madhavanidana. 

Uttara khanda (last part) of the Bhavaprakasha Samhita includes chapters that describe Rasayana (रसायनम्) and Vajikarana (वाजीकरणम्) aspects of Chikitsa (चिकित्सा) in Ayurveda. 

For more details click on Bhavaprakasha Samhita (भावप्रकाश संहिता)  

## References
Category:Ayurveda