Lopamudra (Samskrit : लोपामुद्रा) was the wife of Sage Agasthya.  He was a great sage and a man of extraordinary adhyatmik power. Once it is said that when he was visiting heaven he saw his deceased ancestors with their head downwards. This was a sign of them going to hell. Agasthya was disturbed and when asked them the reason, they said that there was no lineage to continue as he was not married and had no child hence it was Agasthya’s fault. For this purpose he embarked on an unusual course of action. By his yogic powers he created a female who would possess all those characteristics and virtues that would be appropriate in the wife of a renunciate. Meanwhile the King of Vidharbha was noble and virtuous but being childless he was undertaking penances for the gift of a child. Agasthya through his divine powers came to know the plight of the King and arranged for the child to be born as his daughter. The child was named Lopamudra and she grew up in the lap of luxury with the best possible education. When she grew up and reached marriageable age Agasthya approached the King and asked for her hand in marriage. The King was stunned as Agasthya was a renunciate but Lopamudra was insistent that he accept the proposal. Already understanding his daughter’s strength of mind and character, the King agreed and Lopamudra left the riches of the palace to live in the forest at the hermitage of Agasthya. She was a dutiful wife and obeyed his every wish and served him faithfully. When Agasthya told her that he could never give her a royal life Lopamudra asked him to give her the wealth of his knowledge. Lopamudra is said to have written a two stanza hymn asking for Agasthya‘s love and attention as he was always immersed in his austerities.  The Rig Veda includes long dialogues between Agasthya and Lopamudra which reflects on the great intelligence and character of Lopamudra. It is said that both of them together were renowned for spreading the eminence of the Lalitha Sahasranama which is the thousand names of the Divine Mother.  It is said that Lopamudra has reincarnated as the sacred river Kaveri in present times. (Page 5 of PE)

## References

Category:Rishis