Bringing out the original samskrit sources focuses on our Sanatana Dharma texts which spoke about every tiny aspect of our daily life which shapes our Atma, Sharira and Manas. In the present day only a few quotes, subhashitas, shlokas are widely read. It is the need of the hour to bring out which text called out a particular aspect of our jivana vidhana and how it should be discussed in the present day changing lives of our people. This can be achieved only by pointing the readers to those particular samskrit shloka or mantra mulam (root source) in the Vedas and Dharmashastras and not to the secondary or tertiary sources (such as the numerous translations) available in various languages since colonial days. Readers are exposed to the numerous interpretations of samskrit texts (consequently interpolations) referring to which has become the norm in the present day. Unfortunately usage of Samskrit language has decreased over the past hundred years and has led to loss of connect with our roots. 

It is our endeavor to promote Samskrit learning by gradually motivating people to read short shlokas, mantras thereby we as yojakas connect them back to their samskrita mulam and the dharmas. 

## Samskrit Texts Vs Other Language Texts
Shri. Narayanacharya rightly mentions that only Samskrit, by learning which alone, will not suffice to answer the Western scholars and learning only English will not give us proper understanding of Sanskrit literature. So harmonizing Samskrit and English has be our forte. In Dharmawiki, we stress on one of our the core concepts that we focus on the Samskrit literature and explain them properly in the language which the present day reader understands along with presentation in regional language to preserve the heritage.

Narayanacharya: Those who have open Pandora box, this is such a tremendous task. I am getting aged and I feel slightly disappointed that more on the kind of work that I've been doing is not be taken up as a challenge.

In the first few years between 73 and 83, understood, when I took my work on the Vedas many people discouraged me. People who know a little Sanskrit and more of English, so called professors of philosophy, so called professor of Sanskrit, they decried me and said why do you do this, why do you do this? I have been taking the standard reference of this and that. On the other hand, Sanskrit pandit said, if our text are there why do you worry about translating them, why do you worry about somebody distorting. This gap is to be filled, I am very happy to say in modern times there is some enlightening, not enough in universities but by  gurukulas and the voluntary bodies like yours, you train up whole army of people, army of people with sound Sanskrit. They must be rooted in etymology. For example, etymology nirukta accounting for words. We take your dravya for now. We call dravyas, buddhists dravyas, Jada dravyas, God is dravya, man is dravya, you are dravya. What is dravya? The word dravya is translated as substance. The word substance means something which does not change, it means absolute, if god is absolute then the world is Maya if the world is absolute and god is Maya. Two things which don't make meaning to each in terms of its relations becomes mutual maya. The word dravya doesn't mean them, the word dravya comes from drava, to flow, fluid, because the world is flowing, god is also flowing. God is not mute, is not sakshi, god is a participant in the world of process. And if the world enters in the  wrong direction then God manifests himself in the avatara and therefore, we have to go back to the original meaning of the word dravya and in order to do this and convince people in English one must have tarka, vyakarna, nirukta, vedanta, jyotisha. Vedanta also is very important. After knowing these things if one comes to vedanta and then also is endowed with good knowledge of English something, something will come out of it.  Until you know nirukta, until you know vyasakas, until you know saunaka's Brihad devata, you  can't account for the difference between the word Agni, Varuna, vaishvanra, shrist etc. These are different functional names of one God, they are not different gods. 

Europeans have misinterpreted this as different Gods fighting amongst themself and go on rejecting the Vedas. And therefore, you have to assemble all these things together, it's a superhuman task. I do not know how you will bring up a harvest of these people, well versed in Sanskrit and as well as in English. Knowing full well the mischief and the origins of mischief coming from Christianity. Fortunately, Muslims have not entered. They are only tempering the human body of Hindus. They have not caught us but about the Christians are very mischievous. They have entered into tyagraja today. Many of the tyagraja kirtans have been, misused in the sense, instead of the word Rama they have used. You dont know they have brought people like T.M Krishna given him magsaysay award. More people will get these awards, in terms of  lakhs of Dollors, and they are prepared to damage our own culture. Tyagaraja did not sing about yesu. Aruna sairam is doing this. O.S Arun is doing this. And they have been calliadre  a tirade against the Hinustani music, Indian music and said they have been maintained only by brahmins and therefore we are taking it to common man. How can you take Rama and tyagaraja to common man, unless he is willing to come back to vedic tradition.  You want to keep him as a Christian, you want to take Tyagaraja to him and you want him to understand Rama as Yesu. This is stabbing the back. Therfore this is herculean task.  So I only pray God that more energy is given to people like you. Comparatively you are younger, you have longer life and longer vision before you. May God bless you.
Category:About Dharmawiki
Category:DPOV