## Manthra Manasika snana stotram
<blockquote>Sankalpam </blockquote><blockquote>Om Ali Neela Ghana shyamam , nalinayatha lochanam , Smarami Pundarikaksham thena snatho bhavamyaham </blockquote>Expression of wish: Om I meditate on God who is black like a dark blue cloud, Who has eyes similar to lotus and I want to be given a bath by him. <blockquote>Dhyanam </blockquote><blockquote>Ananthadhithya samkasam Vasudevam chathurbujam, Sankha chakra Gadha padma dharinam vana malinam, Shyamalam, Santha hrudayam , prasanna vadanam shubham, Divya chandana lipthangam charuhasam suveekshanam, Vanamala parivrutham Naradadhibhir architham, </blockquote>That Vasudeva lying on Anantha shining like a sun, who has four hands , Who holds conch, wheel mace and lotus flower , Who wears forest garland, Who is black , who has a peaceful mind , Who has an auspicious pleasant face , Who is anointed with divine sandal paste, who has a pretty smile, who looks at you nicely , Who is surrounded by forest garlands, Who is worshipped by sage Narada and others,<blockquote>Suvarna kanganai deeptham , kinkini bhi virajitham, Keyura harinam devam suvarna makutojwalam , Aneka rathna sanchanna sphuran makara kundalam , Dwaja Vajrangusa dharam pada padma sushobitham, That pada pankajath gangam pravahanthim swamoordhni, Chinthaye brahma randhrena pravisanthim swakam thanum, THaya samkshalaye deham bahyamabhyantharam malam, Anthar bahirschs sudhyarthambahyam abhyantharani cha. </blockquote>Who shines wearing golden bangles, who also shines due to the bells, Who is the God with the crown and garland, which makes his head shine , Who wears the fish like ear globes made of several shining gems, Who carries the flag and a diamond goad and has a shining lotus like feet. And from his lotus feet flows the river Ganga from where it commences itself, Flowing of the aperture in the crown of Brahma it takes its own path. I am sprinkling her water on my body which is filled with dirt inside and outside With an aim of cleaning inside and outside of my body, I use it outside and inside. 

Manthram <blockquote>Om Namashivaya Gangayai Shivadhayai Namo nama, Nama stripada gaminyai manthra moorthyai namo nama. Achyuthoham, ananthoham govindoham , aham hari, Anandoham, Aseshoham Ajoham Amruthasmyoham, Nithyoham Nirvikalpoham Nirakaroham avyaya , SAchidananda roopoham paripoornaasmyaham sadaa </blockquote>Salutations and salutations Om Salutations to Shiva , Ganga and all that belongs to Shiva , Salutations to her who goes in three ways who is the lord of manthra, salutations and salutations, I am Achyutha, I am endless, I am Govinda, I am Hari, I am joy , I am everything, I am one who cannot be defeated, I am the deathlessness, I am forever, I am one who never wavers, I am shapeless and imperishable , I am the form of divine joy and I am always complete . 

Paribhasha (definition) <blockquote>Ida Bhageerathi ganga , Pingala yamunathuthaa, Thayor madhye gathaa naadi sushmnakhyaa Saraswathi, Dhyanahrudhe jnana jale raga dwesha malapahe, Yo snathi manase theerthe sayathi parmam gathim. </blockquote>The Ida Nadi is Ganga brought by Bageeratha , Pingala nadi is Yamuna, And Sushmna nadi which goes in between them is the Saraswathi , In the mind meditates dirts like desire and hatred about in the water of wisdom, And he who is able to take bath in that mind would attain the ultimate goal. <blockquote>Phala sruthim : Idham mansika snanam proktham hariharadhibhi, SArdha trikoti theertheshu snanath koti gunadhikam, Yo nithyamachara devam savai narayana smrutha, Kala mruthyurathikramya jeevathyeva na samsaya. </blockquote>Benefits : This mental bath which is addressed to Lord Vishnu and Lord Shiva , Grants more benefits than bathing in half of three crores sacred waters, Those who practice it daily and then meditate on Narayana, Would outlive time and death and without doubt live.<blockquote>Ithi Manthra manasika snana stotram sampoornam </blockquote>Thus end the prayer of mental bath using the chants.

## Shankaracharya Krutha Gangashtakam
This is an octet on Ganga composed by Adhi Shankaracharya, translated by P.R.Ramachander <blockquote>Bhagawathi thava theere neeramathrasanoham, Vigatha vishaya thurshna krishnamaradhayami, Sakala kalusha bhange swarga sopana sange, Tharala thara tharange Devi gange praseedha.</blockquote>Goddess, I cam to your shore, And sat there praying on Krishna, And taking nothing else but water. So Oh Ganga, who removes all dirt. Who is the ladder for the heaven, And who is full of spreading waves, Be pleased with me. <blockquote>Bhgwathi bhava leela mouli male thavambha, Kana manu parimaanam pranino yeesprusanthi, Amara nagara naari chamara grahineenaam, Vigatha kali kalamkatham kam anke lutanthi.</blockquote>Oh, Goddess who is the garland on the head of Shiva, And meant for his happiness, Those beings, who are lucky, To touch drops of your water, Get relieved of all black sins, And would enjoy the fondling, In the laps of those maidens of heaven, Who hold fans in their hands. <blockquote>Brahmandam ghandayanthi hara sirasi jata valli mullasayanthi, Swarlokadha pathanthi kanaka giri guha ganda shailal skhalanthi, Kshoni prushte lutanthi duritha chaya chamoo nirbharam bhathsayanthi, Padhadheem poorayanthi sura nagara sarith pavani na punathu.</blockquote>Let the pure waters of the Ganga of heaven, Originating from the breaking the universe in to two, Watering the hair curls of Lord Shiva’s head, Falling from the heights of heaven, Coming out of the sandal wood trees of the caves of Meru, Falling torrentially on the earth, Washing away the crowds of sins, And making full the waters of the sea, Take care of all of us. <blockquote>Majja mathanga kumbhachyuthamadhira moda mathali jaalam, Snanai sidhangananaam kucha yuga vigalath kanku masangapingam, Sayam prathar muneenaam kusa kusuma chayai channatheerasthaneeram, Payanno gangamamba karikalabhakaraakrantharamhastharagam,</blockquote>Let this waters of Ganga, Which is full of several crowds of bees rushing to drink, The water coming out of the bathing elephants, Which is fully red because of the saffron coloured water , Flowing from the head through the busts of holy ladies, Which is full of different types floating grasses and flowers , After the dawn and dusk salutations done by saints in the morn and evening, And which is full of waves created by the playful elephants and calves, Because of their beating the water by their trunks, Save all of us. <blockquote>Aadhaavaadhi pithamahasya niyama vyapara pathrejalam, Paschath pannaga sayino bhagwatha padhodhakam pavanam, Bhooya shambhu jata vibhooshana mani jjahnor maharsheriyam, Kanya kalmasha nasini bhagwathi bhagiradhi drusyathe. </blockquote>This Goddess brought down by King Bhageerath, Was initially seen as the water of worship from the pot of Brahma, Later it became the purest holy waters washing the feet of Vishnu, And then became an ornamental gem on the head of Lord Shiva, And then later was born as the daughter of sage Jahnu. <blockquote>Shailendra deva tharini nijjale majja jjanotharinee, Paaravaara viharinee bhava bhaya sreni samuthsarini, Seshaheanukarini harasirovallidalakaarini, Kasi prantha viharini, vijayathe ganga manoharini.</blockquote>Victory to that pretty Ganga, who took birth from king of mountains, Who makes people who dip in her waters cross he ocean of life, Who reaches and plays in the ocean, Who completely uproots sorrows from life, Who imitates Adhisesha and bends and flows, Who appears like leaves on the hairs of Lord Shiva, And who flows very near the city of Kasi. <blockquote>Kutho veechir veechisthava yadhi gatha lochanapadham, Thwamaapeethaa peethambarapuranivasam vitharasi, Twaduthsange gange pathathi yadhi kayasthanubrutham, Thadha maatha shathakratha vapadhalaabhopyathi laghu.</blockquote>Hey river Ganga, Where are the pains of hell to him, Whose eyes see at least one of your waves? Hey Ganga, You give to anyone taking a sip of your water, Permanent residence in Vaikunta, And Oh, mother , to any being whose body falls on you, Even the post of Indra become worthless <blockquote>Gange trilokya sare sakala sura vadhoodhowtha vistheerna thoye, Poorna brahma swaroope haricharanajoharini swarga margay, Prayachitham yadhi syathava jala kanika brahma hathyadhi pape, Kasthwam sthothum samartha trijagadagahare devi gange praseedha.</blockquote>Hey Ganga, who is most important in all the three worlds, Who is so wide and big that all women of heaven dip and bathe in you, Who is having the full form of the eternal truth, Who flows carrying the dust of the feet of Lord Vishnu, Who flows in the paths of heaven, And whose one drop is the only cure for sins like killing of Brahmana, Hey Ganga , who can be capable of praying you adequately.? And who is more capable of washing any sin in the three worlds, Be pleased with me.<blockquote>Matha Jahnavi shambhu sanga valithe moulou nidhayanjaleem, Thwathere vapushavasana samaye na rayanangri dhwayam, Saa anandam smaratha bhavishyathi may prana prayanathsavo, Bhooyath bhakthi ravichutha hari haradwaithathmika saswathi.</blockquote>Hey mother Jahnavi, at the end of my wanderings devoted for search For the company of lord Shiva, the end celebration of my travel of the soul, Would happen in your bank , while I would be meditating, Holding my two hands in salute over my head, With happiness , on the lotus feet of Lord Vishnu. Let my devotion to Vishnu and Shiva be permanent, Oh Goddess. <blockquote>Gangashtakamidhampunyam ya padeth prayatho nara, Sarva papavinirmuktho Vishnu lokam sa gachathi.</blockquote>That holy devotee who reads this holy octet on Ganga, Would become free of all sins and reach the world of Vishnu.

## Dasa hara ganga sthuthi
This is a prayer to Ganga that removes ten types of sins.<blockquote>Nama shivayai gangayai shivadhayai namo nama, Namasthe Rudra roopinyai sankaryai they namo nama.</blockquote>Salutations to that Ganga, Who is dear to Lord Shiva, And who does good things. Salutations to you , Who has the form of Rudra And who is also known as Sankari. <blockquote>Namosthu viswa roopinyai brahma moorthyai namo nama, Sarva veda swaroopinyai namo bheshaja moorthaye.</blockquote>Salutations to her who is the form of universe, And who is the form of Lord Brahma. Salutations to her who is the form of Vedas, And who is the form of all medicines.<blockquote>Sarvasya sarva vyadheenam bhishak sreshtyai namosthuthe, Sthanu jangama sambhootha visha hanthryai namo nama.</blockquote>Salutations to her who is the greatest doctor, For every one and for all diseases, Salutations to her who is an antidote, Of all poisons from movable and immovable things. <blockquote>Bhogopa bhoga dhayinyai Bhogavathyai namo nama, Mandakinyai namosthesthu swargadhayai namo nama.</blockquote>Salutations to her who gives all pleasures, And to her who is the Patala Ganga, Salutations to her who moves slowly, And to her who gives us heaven. <blockquote>Namasthrailokhya bhooshayai jagad dhathryai namo nama, Namasthrishukla samsthayai thejovathyai namo nama.</blockquote>Salutations to her who is the ornament To the three worlds and who is the basis of the world. Salutations to her who has three strengths, And to her who is the source of power. <blockquote>Nandayai linga dharinyai narayanyai namo nama, Namasthe viswa mukhyai revathyai they namo nama.</blockquote>Salutations to her who gives happiness, And to her who wears the Shiva linga, Salutations to her who is the most, Important in this world and her who roars. <blockquote>Bruhathyai they namosthesthu loka dhatrayai namo nama, Namasthe viswa mithrayai nandinyai they namo nama.</blockquote>Salutations to her who is very big, And who is the mother of the world. Salutations to her who is the friend of the world, And to her who makes every body happy.<blockquote>Pruthvyai Shivamruthayai cha suvrukshayai namo nama, Santhayai cha varishtayai varadhayai namo nama.</blockquote>Salutations to her who is the earth, Who is the nectar of Shiva and to her , Who gives rise to good trees. Salutations to her who is very peaceful, Who is best among everything, And to her who grants blessings. <blockquote>Usrayai sukhadhogdhaithrayai cha sanjeevanyai namo nama, Bramishtayai brahmadhayai duruthaghainyai namo nama.</blockquote>Salutations to her who is of the form of a cow, And to her who gives benefits effortlessly, Salutations to her who is the drug that cures death, 

To her who is the follower of Lord Brahma, To her who originated from Lord Brahma, And to her who is cure for all ills. <blockquote>Pranatharthi prabanjinyai jaganmathre namosthuthe, Sarvapath prathi pakshayai mangalayai namo nama.</blockquote>Salutations to her who removes sorrows. Of those who salute her with devotion, And the mother of the entire universe, Salutations to her who destroys all dangers, And to her who only gives good. <blockquote>Saranagatha dheenartha parithrana parayane, Sarvasyarthihare devi, Narayani namosthuthe.</blockquote>Salutations to her who follows the rule, To save sinners, tormented and sufferers , Who seek her protection , Salutations to that Narayani, Who destroys sorrows of all beings.<blockquote>Nirlepayai dukha hanthryai dakshayai they namo nama, Parath para thare thubhyam namasthe mokshadhe sada.</blockquote>Salutations to her who is not attached, To her who destroys all sorrows, And to her who is supremely able. Salutations to her who is higher than the highest, And to her who is the giver of salvation. <blockquote>Gange mamagratho bhooya , gange may devi prushtadha, Gange may parswayorehi, thwayi gangesthu may sthithi.</blockquote>Hey river Ganga, appear in my front as well as back, Hey river Ganga, appear on my both sides, Hey Ganga , let me be a part of you. <blockquote>Adhou thwamanthe madhye cha sarvam thwam gaam gathe shive, Thwameva moola prakruthisthwa hi Narayana para.</blockquote>Oh goddess who came with the earth, You have been the beginning, middle and end of this earth, You are the primeval root cause of everything, And you are the Lord Narayana who is the witness of nature. <blockquote>Gange thwam paramathma cha shivasthubhyam, nama shive, Ya idham padathi stotram bhakthya nithyam naropi ya, Srunath sradhaya yuktha kaya vak chitha sambhavai, Dasadha samsthidhair doshai sarvaireva pramuchyathe.</blockquote>Hey Ganga you are the great God Shiva, salutations to you. He who reads or hears this prayer with devotion , Would be free of the sins committed in ten ways, By the mind, words and the body.