Sampradaya Siddha vishaya (Samskrit : संप्रदायसिद्धविषयः) refers to the unique dharmika tradition, the Bharatiya parampara, the sets of traditions and rites, handed down to families and lineages in Bharatavarsha. Sanatana Dharma, advocates unique concepts that have been the guiding force for the Manas (mindset) and Karma (activities) for many generations of Bharatiyas. One who does not have the proper experience due to lack of upbringing (with these concepts) in such environment cannot grasp the basic concepts of the sampradayas in Sanatana Dharma. Digressing from the benefits of such dharmika concepts due to loss and dilution of the Sampradayas has been happening over thousands of years.

Many references and citations given in the huge volume of works available on the internet, and accessed by many people over the world (such as Wikipedia, Institutional websites, Forums, Blogs) have been based on the Books and References contributed by non-traditional scholars. Such scholars (many western and bharatiya) coming from non-traditional backgrounds have given "non-sampradaya" interpretations of Vedas and Vaidika literature. Such literature has been widely publicized, debated and easily made available as popular material in media circulation. Authors of such works are subject to criticism for their "non-traditional" interpretation and extrapolations of Vaidika concepts; however, are used as main references and as authorities of the subject.

All through the Vedas, thwe find a mention about the Devasura sangram, where Devas and Asuras are in constant war with each other. One interesting anecdote is that of the Panis, who hid the Vedas in the caves. Maharshi Angirasa with Indra's help releases them from captivity. This anecdote may be used to draw a parallel applicable in the present times. A similar situation is seen in the case of a student who picks up very important books in a library and hides them in a place to make them unavailable to other deserving students. While this is a common  student attitude seen in these competitive days, along the same lines at the intellectual and society level, are the Patents and Intellectual property rights, the laws which infringe on Bharatiya sampradaya siddha adhikara of sharing and distributing knowledge.  

Sampradayasiddha vishaya means something that is established through the experience of sampradaya; it does not refer to spurious baseless traditions. People like Max Muller, H. H. Wilson, are scholars who did not go through the rigor of Bharatiya sampradaya, hence their perspectives are different from traditional scholars. Many scholars agree that the most digressive opinions have been given in the recent colonial times more than any other period. Hence to protect the esoteric concepts, the Vedas have been kept secret and their knowledge was transmitted only to people who adhered to that tradition. 

Upanishads have described esoteric vidyas which if they fall into the hands of undeserving people will bring about very undesirable effects on the mankind, hence they were called Rahasya (secret). It was the rigor and commitment of the Maharshis that has kept the Vedapatha paddhi alive since ages. It is this focus on the Sampradayasiddha vishayas which is lacking in the present day society, which Dharmawiki aims to revive. Lets bring back our tradition lets reclaim our adhikara! Lets us bow in respect to people like Shri. Abhijeet Dinkar Savale of Trayamabakeshwar about whom Indiafacts author Shri. Surendra Chandra mentions the following with reverence. <blockquote>*Abhijeet’s hereditary shaakha was the Rig Veda, but he was forced to undergo basic training in the Madhyandina Shaakha of the Shukla Yajur Veda instead. Despite his family’s straitened circumstances, Abhijeet volunteered to spend years in learning the Rig Veda, in order to carry forward the legacy bequeathed to him.*</blockquote>Existence of Gotras (lineages) and Svadhyaya (as in Brahmayajna, one of the Panchamahayajnas) of the Vedas is an important concept that relied heavily on sampradaya. Svadhyaya refers to the study of a particular shakha of the Veda by the persons belonging to that shakha. This ensured the continuity of that Veda shakha. In olden days, a person born in the community belonging to Rig veda shakhas, studied only that Veda shakha; he would not be studying Yajurveda. This ensured that the Rigveda shakha continued through the generations from father to son. The same concept evolved for the development of gotras. 

## Reference
Category:About Dharmawiki
Category:DPOV