Vayas is the term that refers to the age of an individual. Ageing is a continuous process which starts with conception and ends with death. Ageing is the accumulation of changes in a person over time. The phenomenon of ageing is described in Ayurveda as Svabhavika (natural) and is inevitable. Ayurveda classics have divided the entire lifetime into 3 or 4 sections on the basis of age in years. This division of age is such that individuals in any one group of this represent some special physical, mental, emotional and behavioral aspects that are relevant to that age group and are manifested due to specific dosha dominance in that age.  

## परिचयः॥ Introduction
Vayas is one of the important point of consideration in diagnosis and treatment in Ayurveda. A specific vayas vibhaga (age group) is vulnerable to specific diseases and must be guarded against them for maintaining their health. Predominance of a particular dosha is normal for a particular age group and to be more precise it is a necessity in order to be able to carry out the specified Purusharthas in that age. Vaya (Age) is one of the medium to achieve the knowledge regarding Ayu (span of life) besides other tools. When these points are considered, evaluation of a diseased state becomes precise, appropriate treatment can be administered and guidelines given to that individual  regarding svasthavrtta could be more specific and beneficial. Thus, ancient Ayurveda acharyas have given high importance to understanding this point.   

## वयसः परिभाषा॥ Definition of Vayas
Ayurveda defines vayas with respect to the kala (time). It is called the characteristic of shariram. The entire time span in vayas is divided in 3 phases. This has been described in Charaka samhita as follows, <blockquote>वयस्तश्चेति कालप्रमाणविशेषापेक्षिणी हि शरीरावस्था वयोऽभिधीयते| </blockquote><blockquote>तद्वयो यथास्थूलभेदेन त्रिविधं- बालं, मध्यं, जीर्णमिति| (Char. Samh. 8.122)</blockquote><blockquote>vayastaśceti kālapramāṇaviśeṣāpekṣiṇī hi śarīrāvasthā vayo'bhidhīyate|</blockquote><blockquote>tadvayo yathāsthūlabhedena trividhaṁ- bālaṁ, madhyaṁ, jīrṇamiti|</blockquote>Vaya is defined as the state of body corresponding to the length of time that has passed since birth. Both Charaka and Sushruta say that before prescribing any therapeutic procedures, physician should examine to obtain knowledge regarding the span of life, strength and intensity of morbidity. (Sush. Samh. Sutr. 35.3)

## वयसं प्रति आयुर्वेद्स्य दृष्टीकोनः ॥ Ageing: Ayurveda perspective
Ayurveda explains Ageing process starting from birth to death as Vaya (chronological ageing). The chronological age is mainly divided into three stages. i.e., Balya (Childhood or early young age), Madhyama (Middle age or Young age) and Vriddha (old age). Each age group has specific state of dominance of doshas and strength of dhatus. This state also affects mind and emotions and thus overall behavior of the individual. The range of age in years for childhood or youth is not similar to that by which we define childhood or youth in today's era. One must understand that the idea behind this division is grouping all those with specific state of body due to predominance of a particular dosha under one category, not not merely the number of years. Acharyas have also explained the biological changes occurring during these phases.

## वयविभागाः तथा वयपरीक्षा ॥ Age groups & Examination of Age
Ayurveda recommends examining age before initializing the process of diagnosis and treatment. Vaidya is advised to identify the age group of the patient on the basis of various classification given below.  

According to Charaka samhita,  
# From birth to 30 years of age it is called as= Balya avastha (बाल्यम् Childhood or early young age) 
# 30 to 60 years of age group is called as = Madhya avastha (मध्य Middle age or Young age) 
# After 60 years of age it is called as = Vriddha avastha (वृद्ध old age) 
According to Sushruta samhita,  
# From birth to 16 years of age, it is called as = Balya 
# 16 to 70 years is called as = Madhya 
## 16 to 20 years of age = Vriddhi (वृद्धिः Growth phase) 
## 20-30 years known as= Youvan (यौवन् Youth and adolescence) 
## 30 to 40 years is = Sampoornata (संपूर्णता Mature Stage) 
## 40 to 70 years is = Parihani (परिहानि degenerative phase) 
# After 70 years Vriddha avastha sets in.
Slight variations in the number of years in each age group can be found in other classical treatises. However, the basic idea of Vayas remains the same. 

### वय अवस्था लक्षणानि॥ Biological characteristics of each age group
*Vriddhavastha* may be of two types: timely (if it manifests after the age of 60 – 70 years) or untimely.[15] Untimely aging may result due to aggravation of *vata* and *pitta dosha*. Therefore, excessive utilization of all the causes of *vata–pitta* aggravation may lead to untimely aging. Some instances are causes of *Rajayakshma* (a syndrome with deficient immunity), carelessness regarding prescribed regimen of *tryopsthambha* (diet, sleep, and coitus), causes of *ojo-kshya* (deficient immunity), excessive and single use of *Amla, Lavana, Katu, Tikta*, and *Kashaya rasa* in diet. 
* According to *Charaka,* Age is broadly divided into three stages *Bala*(childhood), *Madhya* (middle age) and *Jirna* (old age). 
Childhood is determined up to 16 years. When the *Dhatus* are immature, sexual characters are not manifested, the body is delicate, unenduring, with incomplete strength and predominant in *Kapha*. In this stage, *Dhatus* are in developing stage and unstable mind remains up to 30 years. Mild medicaments may be employed. Middle age is characterized by strength, energy, virility, powers, acquisition of all *Dhatus* having reached the normal limit associated with proper physical and mental strength, without degeneration in qualities of *Dhatus* with predominance of *Pitta* and is up to 60 years. Stronger medicaments may be employed to gain the success at this stage. Old age is up to 100 years. There is diminution of *Dhatus*(tissue elements), strength of sense organs, energy, manliness, valour, power of understanding, retention, memorizing, speech and analyzing fact. There is gradual diminution in the qualities of *Dhatus* and dominance of *Vata*. This period should be handled carefully with mild and moderate medicaments because of delicate nature of the old age. There are persons who live longer or shorter than that, in such cases, one should determine the three divisions of age on the basis of strength of the factors like *Prakrti Sara* etc., except *Vikriti* and also characters of different periods of life span.

## वयसि दोषप्रभावः॥ Dosha dominance in different age groups
*Shlesma* enhances greatly in young age, *Pitta* increases greatly in middle age and *Vata* increases greatly in old age. This should be kept in mind before planning any therapy. Use of *Ksara* (alkali preparations) and purgation therapy should be avoided in children and old age in diseases curable by above therapeutics. If it is necessary then it should be done moderately and slowly [12].

## वयज्ञानस्य निदाने तथा चिकित्सायां लाभः॥Role of Vayas in diagnosis and treatment as per Ayurveda
*Ayurvedic* text describes how to attain longevity and also mentioned verities of longevity through *Ayu Pareeksha*. *Ayurveda* explains certain signs and symptoms to decide the life span (*Manam* of *Ayu*) of a patient. *Ayu* *Pariksha* has been broadly classified into three broad headings, namely, *Dhirghayu, Madhyamayu* and *Alpayu* and these are described by *Sushruta* [2]. He says that before prescribing any therapeutic procedure, physician should examine life span of the patients and if they have residual life span then his *Vyadhi* (disease), *Ritu* (season), *Agni*(digestive power), *Vaya* (age), *Deha* (body build), *Bala* (strength), *Sattva* (mind), *Satmya*(conducive factors), *Prakriti* (constitution), *Bhesaja* (drug) and *Desa* (habitat) should be examined [3]. Tenfold examination are the tools described in *Charaka* to obtain knowledge regarding the span of life, strength and intensity of morbidity and these are *Prakriti* (constitution), *Vikriti* (morbidity), *Sara* (excellence of *Dhatus*), *Samhanana*(compactness of organs), *Pramana* (measurements of the organs of the body), *Satmya* (suitability), *Sattva* (psychic conditions), *Aahara Sakti* (power of intake and digestion of food), *Vyayama Sakti* (power of performing exercise) and *Vayas* (ageing) [4]. The basic purpose of these examinations is to understand the overall condition of the person in order to prescribe meticulous and systematically planned therapeutic treatment to get desirable and satisfying successful results. 

## स्वाभाविक व्याधिः ’जरा’ : Jara as Svabhavika Vyadhi
Swabhavika Vyadhis are the naturally occuring diseases from which nobody can avoid. Kshudha, Nidra, Pipasa, Jara and Mrityu are explained as Svabhavika Vyadhis. 5 These Svabhavika Vyadhis are Nishpratikriya (irrremediable). Chakrapani explains that Svabhavika Vyadhis can’t be treated by any other therapeutic devices except Rasayana. Even Rasayana can’t cure or prevent these Vyadhis. Rasayana can only delay these diseases. This suggests that after sometime they will relapse. Hence, these are considered Nishpratikriya. (Meera E. Et:Al; A Review On Ageing And Anti-Ageing Measures In Ayurveda IAMJ: Volume 2; Issue 4; July- August- 2014)

## वयस्थापनानि दशेमनि॥ Vayasthapana Dashemani
Acharya has explained ten Vayasthapana drugs which can be used for anti-ageing purpose.13 They are Amruta (Tinospora cardifolia), Abhaya (Terminalia chebula), Dhaatri (Embilica officinalis) etc.

## वयस्थापनम् ॥ Prevention of aging
Due to limitations of space, only the principles are described here. As previously stated, the process of aging is totally dependent on diet and lifestyle. Aging can be prevented by:
# Including some important principles of *Dincharya* (daily regimen) in the daily routine, for example, *Anjana* (a type of eye treatment); *Abhayanga* (body massage),[21] especially *Shiro-Abhayanga* (head massage);[22] nasya (oily nasal drops);[23] *Sneha-Gandusha* (retaining of oil in the mouth);[24] cleansing of feet and external orifices;[25] exercise;[26] and so on.
# By following the other principles of *Swasthavritta* such as utilization of *Tryopastambha* (diet, sleep, and coitus) according to the rules;[27] to bear suppressible urges (i.e., mental fluctuations) and to expel unsuppressible urges (i.e., natural urges);[28,29] regular removal of aggravated *Dosha* according to *Ritu*(season) by *Panchakarma*;[30] regular utilization of *Rasayana* (rejuvenating treatment) and *Vaajikarana* (aphrodisiacs);[31] following the principles of *Sadvritta* (social and personal ethics) and *Achara Rasayana* (ethics having effects of *Rasayana*), and so on.[32]
# Taking a diet strictly in accordance with the prescribed rules.
Devi D, Srivastava R, Dwivedi BK. A critical review of concept of aging in Ayurveda. *Ayu*. 2010;31(4):516–519. doi:10.4103/0974-8520.82030

## References
Category:Ayurveda